# Use CWL on Galaxy - OpenBio Winter Codefest 2018

Here will be summed up the work done during the OpenBio Winter Codefest 2018 in Boston on the support of CWL by Galaxy.
The work is based on this [branch](https://github.com/common-workflow-language/galaxy) that tries to allow Galaxy ro run CWL tool. More information about this branch is available [here](https://github.com/common-workflow-language/galaxy/pull/47).

## Prerequisites

* Clone this [branch](https://github.com/common-workflow-language/galaxy)
* Install planemo (`pip install planemo`)

## Use cwl conformance tests to run a simple example

Conformance tests are run in galaxy by "mirroring" the conformance tests from the [branch](https://github.com/common-workflow-language/common-workflow-language) into the galaxy test folder (`test/functional/tools/cwl_tools`). The script conformance_to_test_cases.py converts the tests defined in `test/functional/tools/cwl_tools/v1.0/conformance_tests.yaml` to galaxy test cases located in `test/api/test_cwl_conformance_v1_0.py`. These can be run with the `run_tests.sh` script of galaxy root folder.
For instance, to run all of the conformance tests:

```bash
./run_tests.sh -api test/api/test_cwl_conformance_v1_0.py
```

and to run one in particular:

```bash
./run_tests.sh -api test/api/test_cwl_conformance_v1_0.py:CwlConformanceTestCase.test_conformance_v1_0_6
```

## Run cwl tools and workflows directly in galaxy from the command line

@jmchilton created a script called `run_cwl.py` in the scripts folder of the galaxy-cwl branch. This script allows to run cwl jobs from the command line using a syntax close to that of cwl-runner. To run it:

1. Create a Galaxy admin user and configure Galaxy:
   - `cp config/galaxy.ini.sample config/galaxy.ini` to:
     1. add this user (email) as an admin in `admin_users =`
     2. set `allow_path_paste = True`
2. Launch Galaxy with `run.sh`
3. Go to 127.0.0.1:8080, log in as the admin user, and get the user API key in Preferences.
4. run the script in another terminal:

```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
python scripts/run_cwl.py --api_key [your api key] [path to cwl file] [path to job definition file]
``` 
It prints out the job result summary JSON, but does not download locally the job result files (for now at least).

### Retrieve output(s) from cwl tools and workflows

To collect the output files generated by the job and not only the summary JSON, we adapted work done by @jmchilton on [planemo](https://github.com/galaxyproject/planemo) that can be found [here](https://github.com/galaxyproject/planemo/blob/master/planemo/galaxy/activity.py#L330).

-------------------------------------

## Use planemo to run a simple example
**currently broken** @jmchilton is working on it.

```bash
mkdir galaxycwl
cd galaxycwl
git clone https://github.com/khillion/openbiocodefest-galaxycwl
virtualenv -p python venv
. venv/bin/activate
pip install planemo
planemo run --cwl --cwl_galaxy_root=galaxy 1st-tool.cwl echo-job.yml
```
